Pretoria - Government says the process of sending the mortal remains of the South Africans, who died when a guesthouse collapsed in Lagos, Nigeria, to their places of burial, has commenced. The bodies of 74 South Africans, who died in the September 12th tragedy, were repatriated home on Sunday. A formal reception was held at Waterkloof Air Force Base which was attending by the families of the victims. Government is working to repatriate the remaining 11 victims’ bodies as soon as possible. After the service on Sunday, the mortal remains were transported to the GaRankuwa Forensic Pathology Mortuary where they were prepared for transportation by road to their final destinations across the country. Twelve victims were from the Eastern Cape, two from the Free State, 22 were from Gauteng, 23 from Mpumalanga, 13 from Limpopo, six from the North West, five from KwaZulu-Natal and two from the Western Cape. “Areas nearest to Pretoria, such as the North West Province, had by the evening of Monday received the mortal remains. Given the longer distances, Forensic Pathology Service vehicles are expected to arrive in the Free State and Eastern Cape on Thursday,” said spokesperson for the Inter-Ministerial Task Team set up to oversee the repatriation process, Phumla Williams, on Tuesday. She said government continued to communicate with family members to explain the exact dates and times that their loved ones were scheduled to arrive at the government mortuary nearest to the place of burial. Social workers continue to be on hand to provide psychosocial support to the families as they prepare to lay their loved ones to rest. “Government urges family members not to suffer the pain of the loss of their loved ones alone in silence. The Social Development toll-free number remains available to family members who require the assistance of a grief counsellor (0800 428 428).” Williams said the South African government continues to work closely with Nigerian authorities and all efforts are being made to complete the identification process and repatriation of the remaining eleven South Africans. “Whilst the identification process is in the hands of Nigerian authorities, the Government of South Africa remains committed to provide as much assistance as possible to correctly identify the deceased and bring them home for a proper send off.” Disaster Victim Identification specialists from the South African Police Service are currently going back to families of the remaining eleven South Africans to collect additional DNA samples for matching. Williams thanked the families for their patience and cooperation while she reassured the families that all possible efforts are being made to reunite them with their loved ones as quickly as circumstances permit. Communities are urged to continue to offer support to the affected families during this difficult hour when they will be laying their loved ones to rest. - SAnews.gov.za 