Pretoria – Learners from various schools around Gauteng got a sneak peek into the world of science when they visited the Council for Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR) in Pretoria. The CSIR on Tuesday opened its doors to pupils as part of its Science Day initiative, which forms part of National Science Week. Science and Technology Minister Naledi Pandor officially launched the week in Bloemfontein on Saturday. The campaign is designed to put South Africa on the path to building a knowledge based economy by stimulating research and innovation, as envisioned in the National Development Plan. Speaking to SAnews at today’s event, CSIR Chief Executive Officer Sibusiso Sibisi said they want to cultivate a love of science in South African learners. “We are creating awareness and enthusiasm, and getting the learners to feel science. We want them to have a passion for science, and to pursue careers in science,” Sibisi said. He said schools are welcome to visit their facilities throughout the year. “This is not only for today. Schools are welcome to visit anytime throughout the year.” Learners were shown various scientific experiments and other science related activities. Naledi Nkwanyana, a Grade 10 learner at Iona Convent High in Gezina, told SAnews that once she completes matric, she is going to take up science studies. “Before coming here, I wanted to pursue a career as an ER surgeon, but now I have changed I want to pursue a career in science. I have realized that science is more interesting.” Thabo Ditsele, a Grade 10 learner from Hoërskool Uitsig in Centurion, said he is going to study Computer Science after school. “Science is very interesting. We live with it in our everyday life,” he said. Science Teacher at Iona Convent, Willem Visser, said it is important for learners to be exposed to science outside the classroom. “Events like this are very beneficial and open learners’ eyes,” he said. As South Africa’s leading scientific and technology research organisation, the CSIR offers financial assistance to learners with good marks in maths and science to pursue careers in science. Successful learners can be assisted financially up to the level of a PhD. – SAnews.gov.za