Pretoria - There will be no toll fees charged when the rehabilitation of the 50km dual carriageway is completed on the busy N12 freeway in Gauteng, says MEC for Roads and Transport, Ismail Vadi. On Thursday, MEC Vadi announced Phase 2 of the N12 freeway rehabilitation project costing R120 million, which stretches from Eldorado Park to Zuurbekom, near Soweto. This follows a R374 million upgrade of the N12 freeway launched, last month, from Zuurbekom (south of Lenasia) to the North West boundary near Fochville. “The ‘user pay’ principle will not apply to this segment of the freeway being upgraded and no toll fees will be charged. “The N12 is part of Gauteng’s strategic road network. It is critical for economic development as it supports the mining, agricultural and tourism sectors. “It also serves as a major collector and distributor of road and freight traffic for business, industrial and agricultural areas along the route,” said MEC Vadi. The MEC said the total cost of the 50km stretch of the dual carriageway being rehabilitated is slightly under R500 million. The N12 serves as a major east-west link, which connects Gauteng to Mpumalanga, the North West Province, the Northern Cape and the Western Cape. The freeway is also dubbed the ‘treasury route’ as it is visually dotted by mines leading to the “Big Hole” in Kimberley. However, it has exceeded its lifespan of 25-years and has been degrading rapidly in recent years, resulting in the current rehabilitation projects. Both phases of project are aimed at repairing structural damages to the road and the full resurfacing of the freeway. MEC Vadi appealed to motorists to be patient, tolerant and careful on the N12 as the rehabilitation work will result in traffic delays and inconvenience to motorists travelling along this route. He said a large part of the N12 leading to Bloemhof has already been upgraded by the South African National Roads Agency (Sanral). The project will be implemented along 14 municipal wards spanning the cities of Johannesburg, Westonaria and Merafong municipalities. It will ensure that local labour and contractors benefit from the project and it is designed to recruit youth, women and disabled persons into the work plan. Different segments of the N12 project are scheduled to be completed within 12 to 24 months. - SAnews.gov.za