Boksburg – Basic Education Deputy Minister Enver Surty says discipline is not the sole responsibility of teachers, but society as a whole should join hands with educators to instil discipline at schools. “The reality is that we have a huge challenge with regard to discipline in our schools. We should look at alternative methods of discipline as opposed to punitive methods,” said the deputy minister. Speaking on the first day of the school discipline conference held in Boksburg, on the East Rand, Deputy Minister Surty said there was a need for all stakeholders in education to take a holistic look at discipline. Held under the theme, ‘Discipline in Schools Re-visited: Striking a Balance between Ethics and Legislation’, the conference hopes to address the transformation of all schools into safe, disciplined and child friendly institutions. The department wants to use the conference to get key stakeholders on board, and to showcase its current programmes aimed at promoting safe and caring school environments. Deputy Minister Surty acknowledged that there are learners who behave violently towards others. “Lack of discipline could result in anarchy. That should be prevented. We expect children at school to be in a safe environment,” he said, adding that learners must be taught not to bully others. In his welcoming remarks, Basic Education Director-General Bobby Soobrayan said everyone must pull together to address discipline issues. “Discipline is a societal challenge, and parents and teachers need to work together,” he said. He said a clear framework was needed to tackle the challenge. According Deputy Minister Surty, about 20 percent of learners have been exposed to bullying. The department has created a dedicated directorate to address school safety, as it says it is acutely aware that disciplinary problems in schools are a major threat to quality education. The conference is expected to deal with all matters related to discipline in schools and various people are expected to make presentations before breaking into commissions to further explore solutions. Departmental officials, provincial education departments, research institutions in the field of ethics and discipline, school governing body, teacher unions as well religious organisations are also present at the conference. – SAnews.gov.za