By Nosihle Shelembe Sebokeng - Member of Parliament Paul Mashatile has encouraged residents of Sebokeng to start their own businesses in the townships so they can create jobs. “If you know how to bake bread, you can start a business and supply the bread to hospitals. We need entrepreneurs who can do those things,” Mashatile said. He said government would support people who could build viable businesses. “We want to make sure that we have economies in the townships,” Mashatile said. He was addressing residents of Sebokeng at the 30th anniversary for the Vaal Uprising on Wednesday. The Vaal Uprising was sparked by the announcement of the rent increases by the local council. Residents in the townships were against the increase and showed their dissatisfaction by organising marches and demonstrations. The Vaal Uprising introduced a new period of sustained protest that spread to large parts of the country, prompting the apartheid authorities to declare a state of emergency. “Now that we have brought about freedom and democracy, we must build a better life for all our people,” Mashatile said. He said he welcomed the initiative by Gauteng Premier David Makhura to re- industrialise the Gauteng region. “We want to make sure that there are new factories in Sedibeng so that people can get jobs,” Mashatile said. He said councillors needed to make sure that there was no corruption in councils. “It is very important that the resources of the people must be used to benefit them. They [councillors] must work for the communities, not their own pockets,” Mashatile said. He encouraged residents to speak to councillors if they were experiencing problems with housing, electricity or water. “These councillors….must be able to lead us and do the things that we as the community want to see happening. “They are there to lead, together with you because they are your servants,” he said. Mashatile said the spirit of courage that brought down the apartheid regime should be the same spirit that is used to ensure a better life for South Africans. – SAnews.gov.za 