By Sydney Masinga Amsterdam - The Mpumalanga government has officially opened a state-of-the-art boarding school to cater for vulnerable children, including orphans and children who are the heads of their households. Premier David Mabuza and Education MEC Reginah Mhaule opened the 24-classroom Izimbali Combined Boarding School in Amsterdam on Monday. “This is one of the four boarding schools which were established following a pronouncement made by Premier Mabuza. It is aimed at phasing out multi-grade schools and unsafe schools in order to ensure that learners from rural communities, including farms, are able to access the quality education they deserve,” said MEC Mhaule. She said this was in keeping with the government's Comprehensive Rural Development Programme. "It intends to ensure that vulnerable children such as orphans and child-headed families are given the required support and a new lease on life through education,” she said. The building of the boarding school started towards the end of the 2012 academic year. It boasts 24 classrooms, a science laboratory, library, computer centre, 40 toilets, a state-of-the-art administration block, four sets of male dormitories, four sets of female dormitories, a fence, water and electricity. According to MEC Mhaule, the school will cater for 456 pupils from the following primary schools: Broadholm, Idalia, Nongena, Samlee, Thokomala, Westoe, Zandspruit, Riverbend and Lithole. “The principal has already been appointed, as well as a deputy principal, four heads of department and 20 post level teachers. The teachers from the above mentioned schools will be absorbed by the boarding school. The learners are expected to move into their new school at the beginning of April, the next quarter,” the MEC said. She said buildings have been completed in accordance with the scope of work and are ready for occupation. “The appointment of hostel staff is at an advanced stage, with some processes that require review to ensure that available skills, which can be sourced locally, are given consideration. "The classes are furnished, which includes the Grade R class and the laboratory. The computer centres as well as the library still require to be resourced. Bedding equipment and mattresses have been procured, linen is outstanding," MEC Mhaule said. Premier Mabuza said he will donate school uniform to the pupils as the school was in a healthy state to be handed to the school governing body and to the community. – SAnews.gov.za