By Siphiwe Nyathi Polokwane - More than 350 people are expected to be employed following the official opening of a R7.5 million retail distribution centre near Limpopo's capital city. Deputy Minister of Trade and Industry Elizabeth Thabethe officially opened the Walk-in-25 Aganang Distribution Centre in Ga Moletjie village, near Polokwane, over the weekend. “The distribution centre will go a long way in creating employment for many people in the villages of Aganang local municipality, particularly the youth," said the deputy minister. "Local manufacturers and producers of agricultural products such as vegetables, beef, milk, eggs and poultry will benefit greatly from this investment, as the market will be within their easy reach.” Deputy Minister Thabethe said the jobs will be created through the centre and 10 shops that have been set-up around the centre. She said the department continuously seeks innovative ways to help various regions achieve their economic potential through enterprise development and job creation. She added that community members will be able to buy their daily commodities in a clean, conducive, inexpensive and well-stocked shopping environment. "This will not only encourage community members to produce more products, but it will also increase the profitability and sustainability of local cooperatives and small businesses due to increased local production and consumption. "This will result in the creation of more employment, which will assist in eradication of poverty and bettering the lives of the people,” said Deputy Minister Thabethe. Aganang local municipality mayor Maria Mokobodi said the distribution centre was a perfect example of how national and local government can work together to improve the lives of people in rural areas. “We believe that the lives of the communities around the municipality will be changed for the better,” Mokobodi said. Ga Moletjie resident Rosinah Matlala, 45, said retail distribution will also empower them to start their own small businesses. “It will encourage us to establish our own businesses because we will no longer travel to Polokwane to buy our business starter packs,” Matlala said. – SAnews.gov.za