By More Matshediso Pretoria - South African citizens are in for a treat on Mandela Day on 18 July. Selected Ster Kinekor cinemas across the country will be screening the movie Long Walk to Freedom free. The film celebrates former President Nelson Mandela’s extraordinary life journey from his childhood in a rural village through to his election as President of South Africa. It is an inspirational film which aims to motivate people to make a difference in the lives of the less fortunate. Videovision Entertainment, the Nelson Mandela Foundation and Ster Kinekor have partnered to celebrate Madiba’s life, together with ordinary South Africans. Members of the public will be admitted free for the 9:45am show on a first-come-first-serve basis on the day. It is hoped that the early screening of the movie on the day will enable the public to watch the film, be inspired by its message, and proceed to their communities to make an effort to live up to the motto of Mandela Day – “Take Action. Inspire Change. Make every day a Mandela Day”. Fiaz Mohamed, CEO of Ster Kinekor said: “We are delighted to host South Africans for free in our cinemas to be inspired by this magnificent film based on our Madiba’s magnificent legacy. We hope that many will leave our cinemas motivated more readily to serve others and serve our country”. Mandela: Long Walk to Freedom Producer Anant Singh hoped that this initiative will inspire individuals to give back to their communities, following Madiba’s example. “We have partnered with the Nelson Mandela Foundation on Mandela Day activities since its inception and we are delighted to continue this association. We are also pleased to be collaborating with Ster Kinekor to take the film to audiences around the country. We hope that the audience watching the film will be inspired to give back to their communities by following Madiba’s example,” said Singh. Chief Executive of the Nelson Mandela Foundation, Sello Hatang, dovetailed Singh’s sentiments, saying Madiba left South African and global citizens with an incredible gift, a legacy to cherish and make their own. “We believe that Madiba’s value system rests on three pillars: free yourself, free others and serve every day. Let us all emulate the servant leader we loved by all becoming servant leaders ourselves.  We urge the public to attend the free screenings,” Hatang added. Nelson Mandela International Day Nelson Mandela International Day was officially adopted by the United Nations in November 2009 as an annual international day. The UN noted it Mandela's "values and his dedication to the service of humanity" and acknowledging his contribution "to the struggle for democracy internationally and the promotion of a culture of peace throughout the world". The idea is to do something that will benefit those around you on Nelson Mandela Day, which was inspired by Mandela himself at his 90th birthday celebration in London's Hyde Park in 2008, when he said: "It is time for new hands to lift the burdens. It is in your hands now." Today the Nelson Mandela International Day campaign asks that individuals, groups and corporates pledge 67 minutes of their time on 18 July, and every day thereafter, to give back. Cinemas The film will be screened at the following cinemas at 9:45am on 18 July 2014: Blueroute; Bridge; Brooklyn; Carlton; Carnival City; Cavendish; Cresta; Eastgate; Festival Mall; Gateway; Greenstone; Mall Of The North; Maponya; Mimosa; Mooi Rivier; Musgrave; N1 City; Northgate; Northmead; Parow; Promenade Mall; Riversquare; Rustenburg; Sandton; Secunda; Shelly Beach; Southgate; Sterland; Westgate; Wonderpark and Zone@Rosebank. - SAnews.gov.za