By More Matshediso Vereeniging – Learners in Gauteng will soon be able to study on their Ipads, as the provincial Department of Education rolls out a digital learning system from next year. Gauteng MEC for Education, Panyaza Lesufi, said his department together with the provincial government will implement the digital learning system as of next year, starting with Grade 8 and 9. It will then be phased in over the years until it is implemented in Grade 12. “We are tired of learners carrying heavy textbooks. We are tired of having to study in black and white. We want every learner to have a tablet or Ipad,” said MEC Lesufi. He said there was no reason why learners should share textbooks while there where e-books. The MEC was speaking at the launch of the 5th Annual Mandela Day Career Development Festival at Sedibeng TVET College on Tuesday. It is aimed at providing career information, advice and guidance to learners in rural and under-served areas. Thousands of learners from different schools across the province are attending the four-day event. Kamogelo Mosime, a Grade 12 learner from Thandukwazi Secondary School in Sebokeng Zone 6, said he was aspiring to become an artisan or a soccer coach. “I have two options… to be an artisan or a soccer coach. I am going to apply for sports management or engineering studies at Vaal University of Technology, Tshwane University of Technology and Sedibeng College,” said Mosime. Raised by a single mother, who works part-time in the metal industry, he said he understood the importance of education. “When I have my qualifications I will be able to get my dream job and provide for my family.” The festival is a flagship programme of the Department of Higher Education and Training (DHET), in partnership with its entities and stakeholders. The festival premiered four years ago and has been held in Giyani in Limpopo, Lusikisiki in the Eastern Cape, Taung in the North West and Phuthaditjaba in the Free State and has reached more than 9000 learners. Learners from schools for learners with special needs are also accommodated. The festival will end on Mandela Day, 18 July and various celebrities are expected to give motivational speeches to the learners. Sedibeng College Principal, Dr Abe Mashele, advised learners to consider enrolling with FET colleges because they provided skills that could help improve South Africa’s economy. “FET colleges empower not only students with skills but also the communities in which they are located through vocational skills such as plastering, mechanical engineering, etc.” He said most skills acquired at about the 50 colleges across the country could not be found in universities. He advised parents to give their children support when deciding on their career paths. – SAnews.gov.za 