Pretoria - Hardly a day after his inauguration, KwaZulu-Natal Premier Senzo Mchunu is getting his ducks in a row with the members of his executive council (MECs). The Premier has convened a special two-day strategic orientation workshop for the new MECs. Taking place today at an undisclosed location, the workshop marks the beginning of putting in place the programme of action of the current provincial government during this term of office. Speaking ahead of the workshop, Premier Mchunu said the burden of poverty weighed very heavily on many ordinary members of society in the province. He said the immediate task of the provincial government was to ensure the integration of the work of government in order to make an impact. “In my inaugural address, I pointed out that the commitment of this government is to ensure that all the resources of the State are used to alleviate poverty and for the transformation of this province. “Importantly, I assured the people of the province of KwaZulu-Natal, who voted us into office, that we will ensure State resources are not diverted for other purposes,” Premier Mchunu said. Issues of good governance are high on his agenda. “Good governance is about being exemplary and it’s about adhering to the highest ethical conduct. As members of the executive council, we are expected to provide leadership to Heads of Departments, CFOs, mayors and the entire government on issues of financial management practices. “This is the issue that has always been emphasized by the Auditor General.” Other items highlighted by the Premier that will dominate the agenda include the Public Service Act; Public Service Regulations; Executive Members Ethics Act; Public Finance Management Act and the role of the MEC as the executing authority of a department, as well as the Ministerial Handbook. Premier Mchunu stressed the need for all MECs to understand all these prescripts to ensure that they give clear leadership to the departments. “It has been proven all over the world that a clean bill of health not only improves the public image of government but it attracts national and foreign direct investments. This is what all members of the executive council must seek to achieve. “I want all of us to discuss the importance of intergovernmental relations. In this regard, we must put in place systems that will ensure synergies among all government departments,” he said. – SAnews.gov.za