Pretoria - A reference group, which will include legal, intelligence and organisational skills expects, will be appointed to deal with a host of concerns facing the police service, Police Minister Nathi Nhleko said. The group, according to the Minister, will interview several people, analyse information, look at promotions and appointments and gather evidence as well as conduct research where necessary. “It will deal with issues of human resources, suspensions… the state of crime intelligence, administrative queries and perception of SAPS,” he told the media on Wednesday. The experts will be able to advise the Minister on how to respond to these issues. Minister Nhleko said, the group, which has broader terms of reference, will submit its report to his office upon completion. A timeframe of three months has been set for the group to complete its work. The Minister said they will use the work done by the reference group to turnaround the image of the police and build public confidence in the service. No probe into Phiyega Minister Nhleko, who was accompanied by National Police Commissioner General Riah Phiyega, took the opportunity to dismiss media reports that a ministerial task team has been set up to look into allegations of defeating the ends of justice by Phiyega. This follows weekend newspapers, which reported that President Zuma had instructed Minister Nhleko - before his departure to the UN General Assembly meeting in New York last week - to put together a ministerial committee to look into allegations of misconduct against Phiyega. According to the reports, the team would investigate the allegations that Phiyega tipped off Western Cape Police Commissioner Lieutenant-General Arno Lamoer about an investigation into his suspected links to drug dealers. Last year, the Independent Police Investigative Directorate (Ipid) investigated these allegations and referred the docket to National Director of Public Prosecutions (NDPP), Mxolisi Nxasana, for a decision. Reports claimed that the committee would also look into claims that Phiyega misled the public when she said she was not aware that Lieutenant Mondli Zuma, whom she had appointed as Gauteng Police Commissioner, was facing criminal charges. Minister Nhleko said the reports were misleading, as no such request was made. “The allegations were investigated and the National Prosecuting Authority decided not to prosecute on reasons that there were no prospects of successful prosecution,” he said. The allegations of a ministerial task team were also rebuffed by the Presidency on Monday. – SAnews.gov.za